site/docs/community.md, before:

# Community

Substrait is developed as a consensus-driven open source product under the Apache 2.0
license. Development is done in the open leveraging GitHub issues and PRs.

## Get In Touch

[Slack Channel]({{versions.slackinvitelink}})
: The developers on Substrait frequent the Slack. You can get an
  invite to the channel by following [this link]({{versions.slackinvitelink}}).

[GitHub Issues](https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait/issues)
: Substrait is developed via GitHub issues and pull requests. If you see a problem
  or want to enhance the product, we suggest you file a GitHub issue for developers to
  review.

[Twitter](https://twitter.com/substrait_io)
: The [@substrait_io](https://twitter.com/substrait_io) account on Twitter is our official account. Follow-up to keep
  to date on what is happening with Substrait!

[Docs](https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait/tree/main/site/docs)
: Our website is all maintained in our source repository. If there is something you think
  can be improved, feel free to fork our repository and post a pull request.

[Reviewable](https://reviewable.io/)
: We use Reviewable (in addition to GitHub reviews) to collaborate on code and docs. They are
  a great service and support OSS projects.

## Contribution

All contributors are welcome to Substrait.

Commit message:

Adding talks section in community page (#167)

site/docs/community.md, after:

# Community

Substrait is developed as a consensus-driven open source product under the Apache 2.0
license. Development is done in the open leveraging GitHub issues and PRs.

## Get In Touch

[Slack Channel]({{versions.slackinvitelink}})
: The developers on Substrait frequent the Slack. You can get an
  invite to the channel by following [this link]({{versions.slackinvitelink}}).

[GitHub Issues](https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait/issues)
: Substrait is developed via GitHub issues and pull requests. If you see a problem
  or want to enhance the product, we suggest you file a GitHub issue for developers to
  review.

[Twitter](https://twitter.com/substrait_io)
: The [@substrait_io](https://twitter.com/substrait_io) account on Twitter is our official account. Follow-up to keep
  to date on what is happening with Substrait!

[Docs](https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait/tree/main/site/docs)
: Our website is all maintained in our source repository. If there is something you think
  can be improved, feel free to fork our repository and post a pull request.

[Reviewable](https://reviewable.io/)
: We use Reviewable (in addition to GitHub reviews) to collaborate on code and docs. They are
  a great service and support OSS projects.

## Talks
Want to learn more about Substrait? Try the following presentations and slide decks.

* Substrait: A Common Representation for Data Compute Plans (Jacques Nadeau, April 2022) [[slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1H89iwnnmHZ2oMgGpFon9Rv_fJ60RWE0c9drHCZAL8Bw)]

## Contribution

All contributors are welcome to Substrait.
